If people hate Donald Trump, um, by all
means hate Donald Trump, but that
doesn't make you anti-American, right?
It doesn't make you want to destroy the
United States?
Is the war in Gaza justified?
When does criticism of Israel turn into
anti-semitism?
How has the war in Gaza changed American
politics?
This week, a conversation with my fellow
columnist, Brett Stevens.
So, Brett Stevens, welcome to
Interesting Times.
It's good to be here, Ross.
It's really great to have you. Thanks so
much for doing this. So, we're having
this conversation on the afternoon of
the day when Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu of Israel is scheduled to be
at the White House meeting with
President Donald Trump, presumably
talking about Iran, talking about the
prospects for a ceasefire in Gaza. And
ultimately, I want this to be a
conversation not just about the Middle
East, but about America and the effect
of wars in the Middle East on American
culture and politics. But let's start
with the war in Gaza. I think it's been
hard for a while, for me at least, to
see what the actual endgame is in Gaza.
It's been hard in certain ways since the
first days of the war. And I want to
talk about that endgame. But first, I
just want your overall assessment of
whether the Gaza war at this moment
seems to have been worth it to Israel in
terms of how how it's been conducted,
not just at a security level, but at a
long-term political level and at a moral
level, right? I assume you think it has
been worth it.
I do.
Okay. I don't think I don't think any
Israeli government of virtually any uh
political plausible political stripe
could have responded in a significantly
different way
than what this government the way this
government did. We can argue about um uh
tactics, but um you you have to
appreciate that Israel is such a small
country that the death of the the not
not the death is the wrong word. The
wanted murder of 1,200 uh Israelis
affects Israel in the same way that say
12 or 15 911s would have affected the
United States. This is what I mean. Um
there isn't an Israeli
who does not know either at one remove
one degree of separation or at most two
someone who was murdered uh kidnapped uh
um barely survived the attack. Most
Americans, as shocking as 911 was, the
vast majority of Americans never met
even a relative of someone who died in
the towers or a relative of someone who
died on flight 93 or or the Pentagon. So
the scale of October 7th in Israel was
massive and it was it is absolutely
reasonable for Israel to say after five
previous four or five previous wars
against Hamas that they needed to put an
end to Hamas's reign in Gaza once and
for all.
Okay. So I agree with that. But I think
part of what the part of the argument
that you made is about necessity which
is different from in the end wisdom and
morality to some degree. Maybe they're
not they're not completely separable,
right? But like it was absolutely
necessary for the United States to
respond to 9/11 on an aggressive and
substantial scale. I think that's true.
I also think it's true that the way we
ended up responding led us into various
debacles and disasters and moral
calamities, right? So it could it could
be the case that everything Israel has
done is completely understandable and
still fails certain tests, right? And so
I I want to ask about like about about
that test, right? So Israel
the pursuit of the removal of Hamas from
power I also agree is completely
legitimate, absolutely morally
legitimate, right? But Israel has killed
a lot of people in the course of this
war. Tens of thousands of people are
dead. Some substantial number of women
and children are dead. Entire urban
areas have been leveled and raised. And
I guess I'm curious as a supporter of
the effort. How do you assess the point
at which that kind of response becomes
disproportionate?
Two two issues here. One is the question
of moral culpability. Let's let's agree
obviously that the death of a single
innocent child is is a death too many.
Um all of the civilians who have been
killed, displaced uh in Gaza, the the
misery that they've endured over the
last nearly uh uh two years is is
horrific and heartbreaking.
The question then is who actually bears
moral responsibility for uh that death
and displacement? And my argument is
it's clearly Hamas. Hamas, first of all,
broke a ceasefire that obtained on
October 6th uh 2023 in the in the
crulest way. Hamas hides behind,
between, and beneath their own civilian
population. The very opposite of the way
other countries fight wars where they
protect civilians and put their uh armed
soldiers uh forward. And Hamas could end
this at any moment of its choosing.
Hamas could easily release the remaining
hostages and agree to relinquish uh
political power to a Palestinian uh some
other Palestinian group. Hamas refuses
to do all of that. So, it's a little bit
frustrating for those of us who are
supporters of Israel to hear people who
simply just discount the idea that Hamas
bears the line share of responsibility
for the suffering that they have
inflicted on their own people by
starting a war they should never have
started and by uh pursuing that war in
in in the crulest way possible. But a
second point I think is worth
mentioning. You know, you just talked
about
um death and destruction of civilian
life that even in pursuit of a righteous
cause at some point causes causes people
to to wonder whether it's it's worth the
the price. What you described is June
6th, 1944.
People think about D-Day as probably the
um most heroic and most righteous with
no no irony intended in that word uh
moment in American history when our boys
stormed the beaches in in the attack.
But we killed thousands of French
civilians in Normandy through
indiscriminate bombing of targets
because uh um that was the price that we
thought was worth paying in the service
of the reconquest of France and the
liberation of the rest of of Europe. And
I wonder what we would say if we applied
a kind of uh retroactive moral judgment
to uh the position of the United States
on June 5th, 1944. I'm sure someone
could say, "Well, look, the United
States is no longer in danger. We won
the Battle of the Atlantic. Uh the Nazi
regime terrorizes uh Europe, but that's
not really a a major uh concern of ours.
Um and if we uh take if we destroy the
Nazi regime, the level of death and
destruction that we're going to inflict
on European civilian life is just not
worth the cost." That's exactly the
analysis that I hear when it comes to to
Gaza. So we should at least ask
ourselves when we were pursuing our own
existential struggle against an enemy we
thought was the apotheiois of evil, what
was the moral calculus that we pursued?
Do you think that the US was right to
firebomb Dresden?
I mean, is it possible to look back on
World War II and say the US pursued a
righteous cause and we were right to do
it, but in hindsight we we made some
strategic choices that were were
immoral.
Yeah, that is okay.
I think that's an argument worth having.
Um, I was very persuaded by a book that
appeared close to 30 years ago, Richard
Aubrey, Why the Allies Won about the um
merits and demerits of the what's called
the strategic bombing of uh Germany. And
I'm personally torn on this subject
because my in-laws are German. my f my
late now late father-in-law uh was a um
10-year-old child or nine-year-old child
in Hamburg when Franklin Roosevelt and
Winston Churchill authorized the fire
bombing of Hamburg which inflicted
devastation on on a similar scale. Um,
and I think it's it's it's an open moral
question, but I don't think it is
entirely clear-cut to me that the
devastation that we inflicted on Germany
wasn't necessary to finally end the
devastating effects of German militarism
on global security. Remember, that was
not the first war the Allies were
fighting against Germany. They just
fought a a previous war against Germany
when they'd been much more sparing of of
of German lives by by agreeing to an
earlier armistice. I mean, I think it's
fair to say it's fair to ask, was every
single Israeli military action in this
war necessary? Did they have to use
2,000 lb bombs as opposed to uh 500 uh
pound bombs or or whatever? And there's
no doubt in my mind that at in at many
junctures Israel used excessive force. I
would just ask that when we think about
our judgment of Israeli military action,
we think about it in comparison to
instances where the allies used military
force um in uh in pursuit of a goal they
thought was essential to their security
and survival.
Yeah. I I mean I guess I'm trying to
come at this from the point of view
again of someone who agrees some kind of
campaign like this is morally defensible
and that you know accepting some level
of civilian casualties in a war like
this is just necessary but still you
know as we try and assess not just the
campaign itself but also and I want to
talk more about this the reaction to the
campaign its cultural impact on the
United States on American politics I
feel like it would be helpful to sort of
have a kind of moral baseline, the point
at which
a campaign that yields civilian
casualties
crosses a moral line. And and I know we
can't we can't assess that definitively,
right?
No, let's let's let's take another
example. Um I was rereading last year
Ron Chernel's great biography of Ulyses
Grant.
Um, we're, I'm sure, in complete
agreement here that the cause of the
North, the cause of the Union was a
righteous cause. And, um, at Vixsburg,
which was the pivotal campaign next to
Gettsburg in the summer of 1863,
Grant starved Vixsburg, starved the
Confederate garrison at Vixsburg.
So, let's just ask ourselves, how do we
draw the line here? Should we go back
and say, you know, as righteous as the
North was in wanting to eradicate
slavery and save the Union, starving the
Confederates at Vixsburg so that they
were eating rats uh at the end of that
campaign or Sherman's march to the sea
or other other instances of what the
Union cavalry did throughout throughout
the South was such a moral abomination
that we really have to rethink how that
war was fought. It's it's it's a form of
it's a form of Monday morning
quarterback
very that's very easy for us to
uh to indulge in but very difficult for
people who are actually waging the war
to measure at the time in which
decisions are being made. And I wish
there were a a method by which you could
do it more carefully and more uh
judiciously. But I'm always mindful of
Sherman's line war is cruelty. And
that's that's an important reality that
we have to accept when we're talking
about war under any circumstances,
right? But we are we aren't just playing
Monday morning quarterbacking with a war
that is far in the past whose outcome we
know like the war isn't finished, right?
So to me, a lot of the without being
consequentialist, like part of the
morality of war is figuring out what
your endgame is, right? Like if you're
gonna ask a lot of people to die and you
have a clear endgame in mind, it's more
justifiable than if you don't. Right.
There there are two end games that I
think are are important to specify. And
I have no doubt that um President Biden
made absolutely the right call in
October uh of 20 of of 23 and then for
the rest of his presidency in
fundamentally
uh putting the United States behind
Israel's efforts to defeat Hamas for two
principal reasons. Number one, the
endgame for Israel and the Palestinians
should be two states. An Israeli a
Jewish Israeli state um uh and a
Palestinian state living peacefully side
by side like neighbors anywhere else in
the world. But that endgame is
absolutely impossible to conceive if
Hamas remains an undefeated power in
Gaza. But I also think that there's an
American um interest here, which is that
we not only want to support our allies
through out the world, small allies
endangered by uh totalitarian enemies,
but Hamas was one finger among many
fingers of an Iranian power and Iran was
one arm of what is increasingly
coalescing into a united revanchist,
revisionist, anti-western anti-American
front which is Russia or you know
Moscow, Thrron, Beijing and I I think
you could add uh Pyongyang to that list.
So a strategic defeat for Hamas for Iran
and its proxies is in fact a victory for
American interests globally.
So let's talk about America then. Uh
oh.
Right. Well, no. I I because there there
now you want to become really
depressing. No, I mean I I think that
part of we're sort of accustomed to
debates about US Middle Eastern policy
and
Israeli policy. But I would say I'm
curious if you agree that I haven't seen
any
any thing that's happened in the Holy
Land change American politics as much as
the Israel Gaza conflict has changed US
politics in the last few years. The
Democratic party was trending in a less
Zionist direction, less supportive of
Israel. But it seems like that trend has
just been absolutely turbocharged and
the Republican party is still very
pro-Israel. But you can see that also
shifting in some polling, especially
among younger Republicans. And you don't
have to look very far on the internet to
find right-wing factions that are sort
of frankly anti-ionist with
the Tucker wing of the party,
right? which is a real, you know,
there's and again there's been a Pat
Buchanan wing of the Republican party
for a long time, but it just seems like
the current environment has has shifted
things on both right and left. Do you
agree? Like do you think the change how
how big do you think that change is?
The these were these were trends that
you can date back over a decade, right?
Um even at the beginning of the second
inifada at the turn of this century you
started to see um uh the left at least
the hard left in in in America take an
increasingly anti-Israel turn and that
left has expanded on the wings of you
know the Sander Bernie Sanders campaign
and and other uh left-wing uh uh
populists. So I see it more as an
evolution
um rather than a kind of a sudden shift
on account of the last uh 20 or so
months of um of war. And it's the same
thing with the Republican party. Before
there was Tucker, uh there was Pat
Buchanan. Whether the anti-Israel wing
of the Democratic party becomes the
dominant wing, um I think that's that's
quite possible. I'm more skeptical that
it would happen on the Republican side.
I mean, I think on the Republican side,
you have a, you know, a sort of core
constituency in evangelical Christians
that is supportive of Israel for not
just sort of one specific theological
reason, but a whole host of reasons
going back culturally, arguably, to the
to the 18th century. There's sort of a
lot of interesting threads in terms of
American attitudes towards Israel that
long predate the actual refounding of
the state of Israel.
At the same time, like I feel like I'm,
you know, fairly well aware of trends
among young right-leaning voters. You
know, I was I was around for Pap
Buchanan. It feels more substantial than
the Buchananite moment. feels like
there's a skepticism of the American
relationship to Israel that has taken
root on the right in a stronger way than
I can remember in my in my lifetime.
I think and I'm speculating that this is
simply a function of the Republican turn
to a kind of uh broader skepticism about
foreign alliances of any stripe. The
same people who I think would tell you
that they're opposed to American
supplies, military supplies to Ukraine,
uh aren't very happy about our alliance
with uh uh with Israel. The same people
who are trade protectionists would also
be be um kind of not if not hostile, at
least skeptical of our of our support
for for the Israelis. By the way, it's a
good argument at some point soon for the
Israelis simply to wean themselves
completely from American uh military
aid. Israel's a half trillion dollar
economy with a incredibly robust um uh
domestic uh military set of military
industries. the Israelis do not need to
be getting $3 billion of American
taxpayer money even though most of that
money goes to Boeing and and Loheed
Martin and a few other defense
contractors. So I guess yeah that that
gets to one of my questions here right
which is that is this a reality that
Israeli policy makers should consider as
a factor in their own decision-m
if I were the defense minister or prime
minister of Israel I would set the goal
that by say 2030 all of the munitions
that Israel uses are produced in Israel
or at least um um mostly produced in
Israel that Israel should be able to
defend itself. I mean, the Israelis like
to say, "We want to defend ourselves by
ourselves." But the Israelis should have
the confidence of knowing that they do
not have to rely on the goodwill of any
American president, whether it's Lara
Trump or Hunter Biden when he becomes
president. That's that's a joke. Um, but
you never know.
He's sticking with painting. No, but but
not not Hunter Biden, but Alexandro
Casiocortez, right? let's say, you know,
some some figure associated with the
with the current American left. Well, I
do think that when we get out of the
Democratic corridor of um AOCC's
district or maybe the People's Republic
of uh Mamani in in a few months time
that you'll find most Democrats that I
meet take a much more levelheaded um
view of our relationship with uh with
Israel. the potential frontr runners for
the next Democratic presidential uh
candidate. I don't see any of them
coming from the anti-Israel wing of the
Democratic party. What I do see is a
Democratic party that is elevating
voices that um that have many views,
among them strident anti-Israeli views
that are going to harm the party's
chances in the next electoral cycle.
I mean, I guess it it depends on how you
define anti-Israel, right? But from what
I can see from polling when it comes
specifically at least to the war in Gaza
and but also support for bombing of Iran
and so on, right? Like I would say a
reflective hostility to Israeli policy
is a dominant view in the Democratic
coalition right now.
Is that Josh Shapiro's view, Andy
Basher's view, Wes Moore's view? I think
what you're seeing is a Democratic party
that has a progressive insurgency
uh within it. Um but rank and file
Democrats are very ambivalent about that
insurgency and its views on many
subjects of which Israel is one of them.
Um now who knows what what the future
will bring. You know I I I was so
spectacularly wrong about the direction
of the Republican party say in 2014
2015. So I I need to I need to be a
little mindful of the mistakes that I've
made uh I've made in the past. But I
don't see a Democratic party being
effectively taken over by this
progressive uh wing because it's not uh
progressive at some level. It's it's
it's
hostile to the views of middle class
Americans.
What about the part of this that isn't
about Israeli strategy and you know sort
of US policy towards Israel, but it's
about American culture,
right? So again, you and I would both
agree there's been a surge in
anti-Israel sentiment
and anti-semitism.
Well, I assume that you think that
anti-Zionism, anti critiques of Israel's
policy shade really easily into
anti-semitism, right?
Yes. I mean, there one is the um um the
entry drug into the other.
Can you criticize Israel without
becoming anti-semitic?
Of course you can. And you know, this is
one of the points that I tear my hair
out. Look, you want to see the most uh
asserbic critic of uh criticism of
Israel, um go to the Harets's uh
website, a leading Israeli uh paper. Um
Israelis criticize Israeli politics all
the time when it comes to every issue
imaginable. There are no sacred cows.
There are no uh uh uh red lines. In
fact, some of the most strident
anti-ionist voices will often refer to
Israelis writing in harets to kind of
wash themselves of accusations of of
anti-semitism.
Let me just make this baseline point
because again, criticism of Israeli
policy can be mistaken,
but it's always legitimate.
But anti-ionism is not criticism solely
of Israeli policy. Anti-Zionism is
criticism of the existence of the state
of Israel as a state that has the right
to uh the right to exist. So, it's a
little bit different. I mean, if if if
people hate Donald Trump, um by all
means hate Donald Trump, but that
doesn't make you anti-American, right?
It doesn't make you want to destroy the
United States because you can't stand
the policies of of the Trump
administration. Anti-Zionism
is the belief that a Jewish state does
not have a right to exist. Now, I would
accept that that argument isn't
anti-Semitic if people said a Japanese
state doesn't have the right to exist or
a Icelandic state doesn't have the right
to exist.
I mean, in fairness, in in our own time,
I would say that that argument has often
come bundled with progressive views that
generally ethnostates are illegitimate.
I do think that there's
I've yet to see a protest outside of the
Icelandic uh mission to the UN saying
down with Iceland uh an ethnically
homogeneous state or down with Japan
which has uh tends to treat um
minorities in a discriminatory way or
down with Denmark because the Danish
Lutheran church enjoys certain tax
advantages against other faiths in uh in
Denmark. I would say uniquely uniquely
aimed at one ethnostate that happens to
be the Jewish state. And if you are a
Jew whose life story is about um a
mother in hiding in the Holocaust and a
grandfather who fled the Pogram and
Kishv, you have the right to to a
skeptical eyebrow and say, "Why us?"
So, one, I I agree. I think that there
is what you might call just a persistent
excess in the way the case against
Israel is prosecuted, especially on the
left, sometimes on the right, that is
hard to explain without talking about
anti-semitism as this kind of constant
temptation. If you watch internet
culture, right, sort of play itself out,
it is kind of fascinating in a morbid
way that the pull of, you know, you've
gone through four levels of
disillusionment and the fifth level of
disillusionment, you're going to blame
the Jews, right? It there is some sort
of eternal recurrence of that tendency.
All I'm saying is that there is also a
tendency where arguments about Israel
and Palestine are connected to arguments
about American history and American
identity. I agree nobody's protesting
the you know the existence of Iceland
but plenty of people are invested in the
idea that you know France or the UK or
Europe broadly should become a kind of
multi-thnic multi-religious society and
they again I'm describing people on the
left they see their view of you know
some kind of bational future for Israel
as as part of that I think there is a
continuum here that runs from
anti-semitism in excess through sort of
other arguments in in leftwing politics.
That's that's fair and true.
Which is why which is why I worry right
in an age when the left is a very
important part of western culture and
American culture right about the darker
pull right the extent to which there is
this sort of inherent pull towards overt
or tacid anti-semitism in these debates.
And I just feel like that pull has just
clearly gotten stronger because of the
Gaza war.
No, it happened before the Gaza war. And
the best evidence of this was that uh
the protests um the accusations that
Israel is committing genocide happened
on October 8th and the Israelis had
barely were were still clearing out
Hamas from from their own territory.
It's not as if suddenly this terrible
Gaza war happened and the left said, "Oh
gez, you know, these people are
terrible. You know, look at what they're
what they're doing." All of the
feelings, the entire um architecture of
approprium and hatred was in place on
October 6th so that these people would
celebrate on October 8th. And one of the
most shocking experiences to me as a Jew
was going on the 8th of October to a
protest that had been hastily arranged
in which people were look the expression
on people's faces in the wake of this
unbelievable massacre was was euphoria.
So, so when people say, "Well, this is
the result of the war in Gaza." I'm
sorry, but that's just that doesn't
explain the letter from however many
Harvard organizations that putting the
blame entirely on on these on on the
Israelis. It doesn't explain the
protests in Sydney um calling on them to
uh f the Jews. This hatred was there.
And you know it is true that people are
against ethnostates sort of in theory
but you have to ask why is the object of
an obsessive hatred and it's not because
it's American taxpayers because you're
seeing the same kind of protests and the
same kind of hatred in Melbourne and
Sydney and any number of other places
I've visited that contribute nothing to
Israel's defense.
Yeah. Yeah, I mean I think it's
partially and I want to I want to say
again that I agree with you, but I'm
looking for sort of points of tension
here, right? that like yes, I think that
what you saw in the immediate October
8th, 9th, and 10th reaction to Hamas's
attacks on American college campuses can
really only be explained
in terms of a left that has marinated so
deeply in critiques of Israel as to be
functionally anti-semitic and is unable
to sort of see Jews as human beings. But
I also think as someone who has watched
left left-wing politics and progressive
debates play out in the context of other
issues that there is a way in which that
is connected to again critiques of
American history. Right? Like the idea
is that would be for instance that
Israel is a settler colonialist state
and so is America. But the American
American settler colonialism is
unfortunately settled right. you can't
have a viable left-wing politics that
undoes the American project. And so
Israel becomes this kind of displaced
zone of anti-Americanism. I think that's
part of the story.
All of this goes to a kind of um
a kind of a naive and ignorance that
bleeds into functional anti-semitism. I
was in Australia about a year ago uh and
I gave a talk uh at a public library
there where some young uh person stood
up and asked me about the suggestion
that Israel was a settler colonialist
state and how awful that is. Of course,
Australia with the exception of the
Aboriginal peoples are are entirely a
settler colonialist state. Canada is
basically a settler colonialist state.
most, you know, many states in the
world. Yes. You know, Mexico, where I
grew up, is largely a settler colonial
state, speaking a language that was not
native or indigenous to to the area up
until 1519. Um, so the the entire
ideology, which sounds has a kind of
surface plausibility, you know, as my
old colleague Hman Jenkins says, you
know, uh, vanishes in the presence of of
thought. Um but the the second problem
but surely some of the people in that
Australian audience would have nodded
along and said oh it is terrible that
Australia is a settler colonialist
state.
But they will not they will not nod
along to the followon suggestion which
is go back to blimey. Right? They won't
say oh you know my name is Mc McDougall
um from the clan McDougall. I think I'm
going to move my family in penance for
generations of settler colonialism out.
Whereas what the suggestion to Israelis
is go somewhere. Well, where? Poland
where you were massacred. Uh Russia
where you were oppressed. Uh um Iraq
from which you were expelled. Those
those thoughts don't don't really uh
trouble trouble these people. The other
issue and I mentioned this to to this
person who asked the question. I said,
you know, what's Hanukkah, right?
Hanukkah and any number of Jewish uh um
religious commemorations or occasions
are memories of the Jewish fight against
colonial oppressors of antiquity.
Babylonians,
Romans, uh Greeks, uh um and then
following them, Byzantines, Celisids,
Mammalukes, you know, Ottomans, and
finally uh the British. The British are
still upset about the Jewish uh revolt
and uprising, some of which involved
terrorism against British colonialism.
Zionism is is in fact the oldest
continuous anti-colonial struggle in
history and Israel is probably the
single most successful postc colonial
state in the world. So even if you
accept the terms of settler colonialism,
the the the people making that argument
have it exactly backward. Don't you
think though that there is a way in
which the American affinity for Israel
is an affinity of Americans who in the
past saw themselves as settlers and that
that was a good thing, right? That like
the idea of making the desert bloom,
building a new society and so on. That
that that is part of part of the
American commonality with Israel that if
Israel is and of course America can say
we're anti-colonialist too, we had the
Boston Tea Party. We kicked out the
British, right? But these these things
are very complicated, right? I I think
Americans relate at the end of the day
like in 1955 being a settler being a
settler society was in American rhetoric
considered a good thing, right?
It's it's it's that's part of the truth.
I don't think it's the whole truth.
Look, the the earliest pilgrims came to
America seeing themselves as
establishing a kind of new Jerusalem.
the echoes in early American religious
history to the idea of constructing a
new society based on kind of radically
ethical precepts also explains the kind
of long history of phosmitism.
And then there's a third factor beyond
the two that we've mentioned, which is
that America saw in Israel a reliable
ally against mutual enemies who were
calling for death to the great Satan,
death to the little Satan, whether
they're in Thrron or or Gaza City or
Beirut. The the same people who are
blowing up American barracks are are
blowing up Jewish cultural centers. So
all of this explains why the
relationship between America and Israel
is is a fairly profound one that isn't
going to be washed away because some
wing of Park Slope decided to vote for
uh for uh Zoran Mandani.
You mentioned a couple times Zoran
Mandani, the Democratic nominee for
mayor in New York. Um in his campaign, I
think there was an effort to use some of
his anti-Israel positions against him.
It didn't succeed. Um but what does he
represent to you?
Um a combination of unseriousness and a
kind of underlying ugliness of his
flatout refusal to condemn the
expression globalize the inifatada. I
think it was extremely telling that he
he wouldn't do so and that he does so
under the alleged banner of free speech.
Progressives um are never shy about
condemning speech they view as racist or
hateful. But an exception is carved out
in the case of uh globalized the inifat
which which worries me and I think
worries a huge number of uh New York
Jews uh who don't want uh a mayor um who
who irrespective of his foreign policy
views can't see the uh implicit
hatefulness of an expression that is in
practice a call for violence and
terrorism. But most of the people who
voted for Maldani, right, are presumably
not right
motivated by and I I hope
globalized the inifat perspectives,
right?
And the worrying aspect of it is that
Mamani's views on this issue uh weren't
deal breakers uh for those uh voters.
But it should have been a deal breakaker
for most uh morally sensible voters that
Mandani takes this particular position.
Just as for me when people ask me, you
know, do I regret voting for Kla Harris
uh uh last last November. My answer is
no because January 6 was a deal
breakaker for me. So even if I agree
with Trump on I don't know tax policy or
even on on what he did with respect to
uh Iran that that stopped me and that's
why I I I voted the way I did. It wasn't
it wasn't stop something that was going
to stop um other New York uh Mani voters
that he uh effectively sanctions a
phrase or doesn't object to a phrase
which in practice involves the murder of
Jews.
I guess I I guess though that is in a
way an example of the kind of shift that
I worry about being
encouraged by the unpopularity of the
Gaza war, the civilian toll and so on.
Right? Again, it's not the people who
vote for Amdani
um for cost of living reasons and
forgive or ignore things like globalize
the inifatada are not embracing
anti-semitism, but they are in a context
of increasing unpopularity of Israel
sort of downgrading the issue. Right?
I guess I'm just interested in what you
might call sort of concentric circles,
right? that there is a circle
of
critique of Israel, shading into
anti-ionism, shading into anti-semitism.
And I feel like there is a wider circle
of people who go back and forth who were
on Israel's side immediately after the
Hamas attacks, but who are also like
right now in opinion polls not big fans
of the war in Gaza. I guess the question
I'm getting around to here is do you
think this is maybe a strange way to put
it, but do you think Israel has
obligations to the Jewish diaspora?
Uh, yes, of course it does.
In ter in terms of thinking about how
it's how its policies and its public
presentation affect Jewish life in the
United States.
Sure, of course it does. Um, by the way,
you know, old uh Jewish saw, you know,
um the the classic Jewish telegram is um
start worrying more to follow. I mean,
it's it's in our DNA that we're always
concerned about uh implications of
everything.
I I I it would be lovely if Israel had
um more effective spokespeople if um
these uh exceptionally awful characters
uh Bengavir and Smootrich were not part
of the cabinet. But the fundamental
obligation
that Israel has to the diaspora is to be
a safe haven for Jews. Because the long
course of Jewish history is that even in
the societies where we appear to be most
at home, most integrated, most at ease
um will ultimately turn on us. I always
think that in 1922
the greatest philosopher in Germany was
Edmund Hassurl. The greatest scientist
in Germany was Albert uh uh uh Einstein.
And the greatest statesman in Germany
was Walter Ratnau. Three Jews. And
within 11 years, that was a that was a
regime run by by the National Socialist
by Adolf Adolf Hitler. And so Israel's
fundamental obligation to the Jews is
not to simply be a vanity project so
that diaspora Jews can go around and
say, "Look, Israel's making great
strides in, I don't know, desalinization
or, you know, water conservation." The
point is to be a place where endangered
Jewish communities know they can go and
have a margin of safety behind a Jewish
army that they simply don't have in
France or uh present day South Africa or
other other communities. And and what
worries me too is that, God forbid, we
may come to a place in 40 years, I don't
think it's going to happen, but it
might, where Jewish communities in the
United States feel the same sense of
isolation, danger, hatred that, say,
Jewish communities in France do today or
have for the last 15 or 20 years. Again,
it would be wonderful if Israel had
better PR, but the PR is less important
than being a state
where Jewish life is going to be secure
in a way that historically we know it's
never secure anywhere else.
Yeah. I I guess I'm just trying to
the the scenar I'm not Jewish, right?
So, I don't have that kind of historical
consciousness. I have I do have an
American historical consciousness where
though where I I feel like we are we are
in or walking through a scenario where
the Israel that you describe Israel as
refuge, Israel as powerful country that
can defend its own interests and its own
people comes out of this period strong.
I think that's a totally much more
plausible endgame than anyone would have
imagined two years ago. It's a testament
to the success of the Israeli military,
maybe diplomatic success soon as well.
Um, but that we also walk out in the
United States with a Democratic party
that's more hostile to Israel than it's
ever been, a Republican party that
includes a vocal anti-Israel block, and
a culture in which anti-semitism is more
mainstream than before.
Yeah.
And I feel like those things are
connected. And so I just worry about the
effect on the United States and my
Jewish friends in the United States and
I'm worried that there is a tradeoff
here where Israel, if you're in the
Israeli government, you're saying we're
making ourselves more secure than ever
before
and meanwhile without the best possible
outcome in Gaza, you get sort of a
different climate here.
So So I mean obviously I think about
this and I think everything you're
saying is is is fair and and plausible.
Let's imagine a scenario in which um in
November of 2023
after the first um ceasefire which led
to the release of uh a bulk of hostages
um Israel had then agreed to a full-time
long-term uh ceasefire.
Um at that point I think there were
maybe 10,000 estimated dead in Gaza. not
not the numbers that we we have today.
But Hezbollah would have remained in
entrenched in Lebanon. Iran would have
good reason to think that the massacre
of Jews on October 7th was a strategic
gamble that had paid off for them. The
left would still be accu left here in
the west would still be accusing Israel
of being a genocidal apartheid state
that should be boycotted and uh divested
from. Um, on balance if Israel had done
what reasonable people think would have
been kind of a moderate course, right? I
think it would emerge, not only Israel,
but the Jews would emerge in a much
worse place than they are now. I think
you can bid for the world's love, but
you can also bid for the world's
respect. And what Israel has won at very
high cost to all parties. But what it
has won, I think, is a measure of
respect that in the longer term serves
the interests of Jews in Israel and the
diaspora better than the alternative
scenario I painted, which is some
calibrated but ultimately kind of
feckless response that would have left
things pretty much as they had been uh
before.
On that note, Brett Stevens, thank you
so much for joining me.
It's a pleasure.
[Music]